# Estimating the impact of working on elections


[This is for those interested in electoral work. I'm a real beginner at making this kind of estimate, but luckily I followed the lead of a paper called "What is the probability your vote will make a difference?" (Gelman, Silver and Edlin 2012). Numbers below are highly speculative.]


What is the impact of working on the 2020 election (e.g. via GOTV)? Morris and Gelman estimate that the probability of a single vote deciding the presidential election is at most 2e-7 (in competitive states like New Hampshire) and lower in other states.[1] Assuming that the probability for n votes being decisive is almost n times the probability for one vote, I estimate that boosting the vote margin for Democrats by 2% of turnout in nine swing states increases Biden’s chances of winning by 9%.[2] Let’s say I personally did 1% of the work that boosted the vote margins by 2%; then I increased Biden’s chances of winning by .09%.


For the Senate, McCartan estimates that the probability of a single vote changing the Senate majority party ranges from 3e-6 (in competitive states like Montana) to 6e-9 (New Jersey).[3] Making a similar linear approximation as before, I estimate that boosting the vote margin for Democrats by 2% of turnout in nine swing states increases chances for Democratic control by 15%.[4] If I get 1% of the credit for that work, I boosted the Democratic chances for Senate control by .15%.


One more note: the calculations done by Morris, Gelman and McCartan above suggest that, if all other factors (like cost per impression) are equal, it pays most to target NH, PA, WI, MI, AZ, FL, NV, GA, NC and ME for the presidential election, and MT, AL, ME, IA, SD, NM, AZ, KS and WY for the Senate elections. If costs are not equal, one can calculate a higher bang-per-buck by dividing the probability of decisive vote in a given state by the cost of serving an impression in that state.


Now there are many, many caveats with these impact estimate numbers, and I am not so confident in their precise values. They depend significantly on the authors’ forecasting models and probability distributions over election outcomes. The 2% vote margin boost may not be achievable; for example, Broockman and Kalla suggest that conveying a pro-Biden message to someone swings the vote margin in Biden’s favor by .015-.055 because voters do not know much about Biden now (June 2020), with a decrease in this number as the election season proceeds.[5] Or the 2% may be an overestimate; who knows what creative ideas exist for GOTV or ads?[6] I am making many assumptions like the almost-linear approximation. But I just wanted an order of magnitude to better contextualize the impact I might be having with electoral work.


In investigating this question, I scratched the surface of the very interesting area of electoral forecasting. There has been plenty of interesting work on this question; some of my favorites were Elliott Morris’s description of The Economist’s 2020 presidential race forecast methodology (developed with Professor Andrew Gelman)[7] and Cory McCartan’s analogous writings of his 2020 Senate, House and presidential forecasts[8], as well as Andrew Gelman, Nate Silver, and Aaron Edlin’s 2012 paper on how to translate such forecasts into estimates of the impact of voting (the probability of your vote changing the election outcome) and electoral work like GOTV.[9] The probability of your vote changing the election outcome seems inversely correlated with the anticipated closeness of the election, and it’s striking to see how many landslide presidential elections occurred in the late 20th century (e.g. 1952, 1956, 1964, 1972, 1980, 1984, 1988, 1992 and 1996, in which one side garnered 350+ electoral votes). These corresponded to low probabilities of a vote changing those elections[10]. This contrasts close elections in recent memory like 2016 and 2000, and puts statements like “Biden is forecast to have an 8 in 9 chance of winning”[11] in perspective (that’s not *so* skewed when compared to historical landslides).


Anyway, these numbers make me like the impact of doing high-leverage electoral work. There seems to be momentum around climate legislative proposals now, and, if current Senate forecasts are somewhat correct[12], this is one of those years in which the GOP’s structural advantage in the Senate is not so overwhelming that there’s no way to swing the election in favor of the Democrats. Perhaps this will only be harder to do in the future. Each year we wait, the United States is responsible for another ~0.5 ppm atmospheric CO2; getting a policy that reduces that to 0.25 ppm annually, starting next year, would save a hefty 2.5 ppm versus waiting for ten years to implement the same policy. If we assume that my share of the aforementioned electoral work increases by .01% the chance of the joint outcome in which Biden is president and Democrats control the Senate, and that a Democratic trifecta will pass the aforementioned climate policy, then I can proudly claim credit for 2.5e-4 ppm averted. I would have had to mitigate ~400 Kt of emissions some other way to achieve that kind of emissions reduction.

[1] Elliott Morris and Andrew Gelman, “Personal Communication,” n.d.

[2] First, the linear extrapolation is justified as follows: The probability of one NM vote being decisive in 2008 was 1.7e-7 (from eyeballing the top plot in Figure 2 in Gelman, Silver, and Edlin, “What Is the Probability Your Vote Will Make a Difference?”). The same paper reports a 1 out of 6000 chance of 1,000 NM votes being decisive. This is consistent with a model in which 1,000 votes has probability just under 1,000 * 1.7e-7 of being decisive (1 / 6000 is about 1.67e-4, which is just under 1.7e-4). It makes sense that the relationship is slightly sublinear (diminishing marginal returns). Second, I calculated 11.7 percent as follows: For the 2020 election, suppose we boost the vote margin for Democrats by 2% of turnout in NH, PA, WI, MI, AZ, FL, NV, GA, NC and ME. The combined turnout in these states in 2016 was 14,685,208 in the first four, in which Morris estimates that one vote has probability 2e-7 of shifting the election; 13,150,081 in the AZ, FL and NV, with a “decisive vote” probability of 1.5e-7; and 9,604,223 in GA, NC and ME, with a “decisive vote” probability of 1e-7 (“Voter Turnout Data - United States Elections Project.”). 2% of these numbers is 293,704, 263,002 and 192,084, respectively. The probability of those numbers making a difference is then just below 293,704 * 2e-7 + 263,002 * 1.5e-7 + 192,084 * 1e-7 = 11.7%. This is the linear approximation and it might be too high, since The Economist forecasts (as of July 1, 2020) that Biden has a ~89% chance of winning the election, so let’s take it down to 9%, which gives Biden a 98% chance of winning if this 2% goal is achieved. This seems more reasonable; swinging the vote margin by 2% of turnout in nine swing states seems like it would be enough to all but guarantee Biden’s victory. The number only increases as other states are added.

[3] Cory McCartan, “2020 Election Forecasts,” March 12, 2020, https://corymccartan.github.io/election-2020/.

[4] This calculation is similar to the one for president. The nine states are MT, AL, ME, IA, SD, NM, AZ, KS and WY. The total probability is .02 * (2.833320e-06 * 486066 + 2.430015e-06 * 311441 + 1.946400e-06 * 700599 + 1.099995e-06 * 1541036 + 9.719500e-07 * 369656 + 7.737950e-07 * 775793 + 7.141200e-07 * 2530730 + 6.272600e-07 * 1177922 + 5.868300e-07 * 244862), where numbers like 2.833320e-06 correspond to probabilities of one vote being decisive across states, and 486066 is the turnout from the last Senate election during a presidential election year in that state. These terms add to 17.7%, which again seems too high in light of McCartan’s forecast that the Democrats have a 5 in 6 chance of controlling the Senate; therefore I adjust my number to account for diminishing marginal returns to 15%.

[5] David Broockman and Joshua Kalla, “When and Why Are Campaigns’ Persuasive Effects Small? Evidence from the 2020 US Presidential Election,” June 8, 2020, https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/m7326.

[6] Another caveat is that these forecasts already assume that Biden is going to run a decent campaign where he, along with the media, educates people on where he stands on the issues, which implies that once Biden takes the advice to advertise specific pro-Biden facts, that gets us to the point of the forecast but not further than that. The implication is to tell Biden to do that pro-Biden specific advertising, but this additional 2% needs to come from something else.

[7] “How The Economist Presidential Forecast Works,” The Economist, accessed July 2, 2020, https://projects.economist.com/us-2020-forecast/president/how-this-works.

[8] McCartan, “2020 Election Forecasts.”

[9] Andrew Gelman, Nate Silver, and Aaron Edlin, “What Is the Probability Your Vote Will Make a Difference?,” Economic Inquiry 50, no. 2 (2012): 321–26, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1465-7295.2010.00272.x.

[10] Andrew Gelman, Gary King, and W. John Boscardin, “Estimating the Probability of Events That Have Never Occurred: When Is Your Vote Decisive?,” Journal of the American Statistical Association 93, no. 441 (March 1, 1998): 1–9, https://doi.org/10.1080/01621459.1998.10474082.

[11] Elliott Morris, “Forecasting the US 2020 Elections,” The Economist, accessed July 2, 2020, https://projects.economist.com/us-2020-forecast/president.

[12] McCartan, “2020 Election Forecasts.”
